
### Data Warehouse
In this project, we will acreate a data warehouse by using AWS and build an ETL pipeline for a database hosted on Redshift.

We will need to load data from S3 to staging tables on Redshift and execute SQL statements that create the analytics tables from these staging tables.

### Build an ETL pipeline that does the following:
    - Extracts their data from S3
    - Stages them in Redshift
    - Transforms data into a set of dimensional tables
    - Continue finding insights in what songs their users are listening to.

**Song Dataset**

The first dataset is a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID.

For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset

    - song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json
    - song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json

And below is an example of what a single song file, TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json, looks like.

     {"num_songs": 1,
     "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7",
     '"artist_latitude": null,
     "artist_longitude": null,
     "artist_location": "",
     "artist_name": "Line Renaud",
     "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1",
     "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff",
     "duration": 152.92036,
     "year": 0}

**Log Dataset**
The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above.These simulate app activity logs from an imaginary music streaming app based on configuration settings. The log files in the dataset you'll be working with are partitioned by year and month.

For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

     - log_data/2018/11/2018-11-12-events.json
     - log_data/2018/11/2018-11-13-events.json


### Database schema design

**Staging Tables**
 - staging_events
 - staging_songs

**Fact Table**
  - songplays - records in event data associated with song plays i.e. records with page NextSong
      - *songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent*

**Dimension Tables**
  - users - All app users
      - *user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level*
  - songs - songs in music database
      - *song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration*
  - artists - artists in music database 
      - *artist_id, name, location, lattitude, longitude*
  - time - timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units 
      - *start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday*
      
### Project structure
This project includes the following script files:

  - *create_cluster_IaC.py*: the Infrastructure as Code file that creates a cluster and a role
      Note: Make sure that the role and the cluster are connected to the right secuirty group
  - *create_table.py*: contains fact and dimension tables for the star schema in the Redshift data warehouse.
  - *etl.py*: data gets loaded from S3 into staging tables on Redshift and then processed into the analytics tables on Redshift.
  - *sql_queries.py*: SQL statements are defined, which are then used by etl.py, create_table.py.
  - *visualization.ipynb*: create several visualizations to confirm that the data is properly loaded and to answer some question about the data. 

### Steps to Run
To run this project you will need to fill the following information, and save it as dwh.cfg in the project root folder.
    
    [CLUSTER]
    HOST= ## This is the same as your endpoint
    DB_NAME= #fill this out 
    DB_USER= #fill this out 
    DB_PASSWORD= #fill this out 
    DB_PORT= #fill this out 

    [IAM_ROLE]
    ARN= #create a role and it will give you this, remember to fill it out


    [S3]
    #this where the files were, note: they are on the west coast
    LOG_DATA='s3://udacity-dend/log_data'
    LOG_JSONPATH='s3://udacity-dend/log_json_path.json'
    SONG_DATA='s3://udacity-dend/song_data'

    [AWS]
    KEY= #keep this safe and a secret (do not share publicly)
    SECRET= #keep this safe and a secret (do not share publicly)

    [DWH]
    DWH_CLUSTER_TYPE       = #fill this out 
    DWH_NUM_NODES          = #fill this out 
    DWH_NODE_TYPE          = #fill this out 
    DWH_CLUSTER_IDENTIFIER = #fill this out 
    DWH_DB                 = #fill this out 
    DWH_DB_USER            = #fill this out 
    DWH_DB_PASSWORD        = #fill this out 
    DWH_PORT               = #fill this out 
    DWH_IAM_ROLE_NAME      = #fill this out 


Run the create_cluster script to set up the needed infrastructure for this project.
    
    python create_cluster_IaC.py

Run the create_tables script to set up the database staging tables
    
    python create_tables.py

Finally, run the etl script to extract data from the files in S3, stage it in redshift, and finally store it in the dimensional tables.
    
    python etl.py